## Do we need a deposit?

What we do is called a specialized service. (Some idiot reading over your shoulder will probably whisper ‘bespoke’ at this point, but he doesn’t know what the word means.) That means that we design and build things to serve customized solutions. This means I need to procure resources before I start the work. Your time is a resource. And since resources allocated to a specialized project are no longer useful for anything but that specialized solution, they need to be paid for before they are allocated.

Let me give you an example: you can go to IKEA right now and pick up a shelving unit for $100. They already made it. They’re a set size. And if you’re lucky enough that it’s the size you need you’re set. That’s what’s called a commodity. But if you live in a weird-sized apartment, like I do, and you need a weird-sized shelving unit to hold your records (which are also very heavy), you’ll find yourself going to a carpenter. The carpenter will measure your space, ask how strong you need the shelves to be, recommend a few different woods for the job, show you a variety of finishes, and quote you a price based on your answers. The carpenter will then ask you for 50% of that estimate, and return six weeks later with the perfect shelves. And ask for the remaining 50%.
If he didn’t get that 50% up front he’d be putting his own money up for buying wood and other supplies. And taking a huge risk that I’d weasel out of the deal after we did the work. (Which would be a shitty thing to do.) And he’d be stuck with a shelving unit that only works in my weird apartment. The 50% deposit ensures that we both have skin in the game.
Everyone who does custom work operates in the exact same way. And you will too. And while your customer may not have worked with a designer before, I’m sure they’ve worked with a tailor, a seamstress, a baker, a wedding photographer, a tattoo artist, a mechanic, a cobbler, an optometrist, etc. So they know the drill. Your job is to explain to them that you’re in that class of professional.
As to the current project: now that you know you should’ve gotten paid up front, your best bet is to get your client to agree on a milestone for your first payment. Make it one that’s coming up pretty soon. And try for 50% but be ready to fight for it. Your goal here is not to get too deep into resource debt. No one likes to be asked for money when they weren’t expecting it, so don’t be surprised if your client registers some discomfort with the situation. Remember, you’re the one who screwed up. Also, remember that you’re under no obligation to work for free. So if you’re getting a feeling that you’re going to be left holding the bag, get the hell out.
